Abstract 
Issue addressed: University students generally make independent decisions 
regarding food choices. Current Australian research about the level of nutrition 
knowledge, sources of that knowledge and influences on food choices for this group 
is scarce.   
Methods: Qualitative data was collected from gender separated focus groups 
comprising four female (n=31) and four male (n=18) to identify: nutrition knowledge; 
sources of knowledge; factors that influence food choices; perceived relevant 
nutrition messages; and how best to deliver them.   
Results: Significant gaps in knowledge were identified particularly regarding number 
of serves and serving size for food groups. Social media was the most commonly 
reported source of knowledge.  Social media was also a major influence on food 
choice due to its impact on body ideals.    
Conclusion: Current health promotion nutrition messages were perceived as 
irrelevant given the focus on long-term health risks.  Health and adhering to the 
Australian Dietary Guidelines were not identified as significant influences. The desire 
to look a particular way was identified as the major influence on food choice. 
So What? While there is an awareness of Australian Dietary Guidelines, university 
students did not to adhere to them as health is not a significant influence on food 
choice.  This identifies a significant challenge for developing relevant preventive 
health messages for this target audience.  
Summary 
Focus groups were conducted with university students’ (18-25yrs) to explore 
influences on food choice. Currently health promotion nutrition messages were 
perceived as irrelevant.  The major source of nutrition information was social media, 
which was also reported as the major influence on food choice due to its impact on 
body ideals. 
Key words: university students, food choices, body ideals, social media. 
1	
Introduction 
Emerging adulthood describes the ages 18-25 years (1), when individuals are 
establishing independence and taking responsibility for life choices, including health 
behaviours (2).  As such this group is an important target population for health 
promotion and disease prevention. Previous research indicates that very few 
emerging adults meet current dietary guidelines, often consuming diets high in 
saturated fats, sugar and sodium along with decreased vitamin, mineral and fibre 
intake, all of which are associated with later life obesity and chronic disease (3, 4). 
The Australian Bureau of Statistics (5) reports that emerging adults are less likely 
than any other age group to consume recommended amounts of fruit and 
vegetables. They also typically display erratic eating behaviors and tend to skip 
meals (3, 4, 6).  
While some research has occurred with emerging adults internationally, little 
research has explored the evolving social influences affecting food preferences of 
Australian emerging adults (2), and in particular Australian university students. 
Emerging adulthood is a time when living situation may change and this can 
influence food intake.  Mullan et al.  (28) found that as emerging adults leave home 
and live independently there is a decline in healthy dietary habits. Specific to 
university students a study of four European countries reported participants who had 
moved away from their parental home identified a lower consumption of healthy 
foods, specifically fruit and vegetables (7). The authors speculated that students 
living at home did not have to pay for their food so financial constraints may not 
restrict the purchase of healthy food.  In addition, meals containing nutritious foods 
such as vegetables were more likely to be prepared for them when living with parents 
therefore healthier food was more freely available compared to food options available 
to the students living away from home.  Furthermore, Jackson and Berry (8) reported 
that those  living at home with parents were more likely to bring a packed lunch, which 
may act as a protective factor against the consumption of fast food during their day 
at university.  
Kelly, Mazzeo, and Bean, (27) identified that living with other 
university students can negatively influence eating behaviors because of a lack of 
peer support to eat healthily. Devine and Lloyd (9) found that university students in 
Northern Ireland who lived alone were more likely to eat fresh vegetables and salads 
regularly compared to students who lived with other students. This peer influence is 
2	
further reinforced by McArthur and Pawlak (10) who reported that American 
university students perceived their peers did not enjoy consuming healthy food and 
this influenced their own food choices.  
While nutrition knowledge is assumed to influence dietary habits and food 
preferences, Al-Khamees (11) study involving university students from Kuwait 
enrolled in nutrition and education courses noted that many were genuinely surprised 
that their diet did not comply with dietary guidelines. Even for this knowledgeable, 
unique, target group translating dietary guidelines into their food choices was difficult. 
While not specific to university students, an Australian study by Kothe and Mullan 
(12) identified that emerging adults also had significant knowledge gaps regarding 
serving size and quantity of fruit and vegetables recommended by the Australian 
Dietary Guidelines and appeared to have insufficient knowledge of food preparation 
and cooking skills.  The authors suggested more research is needed to investigate 
these knowledge gaps and how these gaps might influence food choice in emerging 
adults (12). 
Australian public health campaigns have attempted to increase nutrition knowledge. 
The Go for 2 and 5 campaign, primarily targeted parents of children aged up to 17 
years with the secondary target group youth aged 13-17 years and aimed to increase 
fruit and vegetable consumption by increasing knowledge of the importance of 
consuming these foods (13).  Several follow-on campaigns such as Measure Up in 
2008, Swap it Don’t Stop it in 2011 and the Live Lighter campaign in 2014, linking 
increased waist measurement with risk of chronic diseases targeted 25-50 year olds 
and focused on weight reduction messages (14).  Emerging working adults however, 
appear to place little importance on the prevention of chronic disease because they 
believe this will not affect them until they are much older. Consequently, the 
consumption of healthy food is not considered a priority as there is no sense of 
urgency regarding the importance of food choices for health and wellbeing (6, 15). 
No known research has considered if university students also have this perception.  
To date, in Australia there have been no public health campaigns that target 
emerging adults and specifically university students’ nutrition knowledge and food 
intake. Furthermore, it is unknown if health promotion campaigns delivered via the 
traditional media (television and radio) would resonate with this population. It is 
possible however, that they have been exposed to these campaigns along with a 
variety of other nutrition messages from media including the internet and social 
3	
media.  It is a reasonable assumption therefore that these sources of nutrition 
information may impact on their nutrition knowledge. To the author’s knowledge this 
is the first Australian study to investigate this assumption.  
Social media is an increasingly popular way for users to be both creators and 
consumers of health information by providing a platform to share, discuss, create, 
modify and exchange information with the ‘on-line’ networks (16). As 18-29 year old 
social media users are more likely to repost images and video (17) it is potentially an 
important vehicle to disseminate nutrition information. However, Wong and Merchant 
(16) cautions that the information they engage with may be inaccurate, misleading or 
misinterpreted and therefore lead to health risk behaviours (16). Little research has 
explored if social media would be effective in delivering nutrition messages to 
university students.   
Given the lack of evidence regarding Australian emerging adults’ nutrition knowledge 
and the sources of this knowledge it is important to explore this as a potential 
influence on eating behaviour.  This information can be used to inform the 
development and best delivery of relevant and targeted nutrition messages as a key 
element of chronic disease prevention. 
Hence the aims of our study were to identify: 
1. Nutrition knowledge among university students;
 2. Sources of nutrition information and preferred source of information among
 university students
 3. Factors that influence food choice and eating behaviour of university students;
 4. Nutrition knowledge relevant to university students and how best to deliver
 nutrition messages to the target audience.
 Methods 
A qualitative approach using focus group was chosen to provide participants the 
opportunity to describe their experiences in their own words thus providing the 
researcher a clearer understanding of the experiences as seen from the individual’s 
point of view (18, 19). University students aged 18-25 years currently studying at a 
private university in Australia were invited to participate in focus group discussions.  
Ethics approval was obtained through the university’s Human Research Ethics 
committee prior to conducting this research (Ref: 015126F).  A total of 49 students 
4	
aged 18-25 years self-selected to participate from a variety of learning areas 
including Schools of Medicine, Arts and Sciences, Health Science, Business, and 
Philosophy and Theology.  Gender separated focus groups were conducted 
consistent with focus group methodology that advises homogeneous groups assist 
participants to feel equal and to get to know each other more quickly so they feel 
comfortable to share ideas and information (20). Focus groups were conducted until 
the research team determined that data saturation had been met.  A total of eight 
focus groups, four female groups (n=31) and four male groups (n=18) were 
conducted.  
Experts in qualitative research and nutrition developed the interview schedule for the 
focus groups. It was piloted with a small group of university students to ensure the 
questions elicited appropriate responses. The same interview schedule was used for 
all focus groups. Each focus group session was allocated 90 minutes. The primary 
author, experienced in conducting focus groups conducted all focus groups (21). An 
independent note taker recorded additional notes and non-verbal interactions of 
participants to augment the audio-recording (22). 
Analysis 
With consent from participants, the focus groups were taped by the lead author, then 
transcribed verbatim by an independent contractor, with these transcripts checked by 
the lead author to ensure accuracy (6, 22).  Content was analysed and coded by the 
lead author to establish categories and identify the frequency by which they occurred 
(23).  These categories were identified across the focus groups and any new themes 
were categorised as they emerged.  Verification checks occurred by co-authors to 
ensure agreement in identification of categories (22).  The data was then re-analysed 
using NVivo data analysis software v11 (24) , validating the categories and sub 
categories established by the initial content analysis. 
Results 
Common factors influencing food choice, including those that related to nutrition 
knowledge were grouped into two major categories: internal and external influences.  
Two additional categories emerged: nutrition knowledge deemed relevant by 
emerging adults and preferred delivery method of nutrition knowledge.  
5	
Internal influences on food choice 
Internal influences sub categories included: level of nutrition knowledge based on the 
Australian Dietary Guidelines; knowledge of serving size for different food groups; 
perceived relevance of dietary guidelines; compliance to dietary guidelines; body 
image, appearance and weight control; and cooking skill and confidence. 
Knowledge of Australian Dietary Guidelines 
The majority of the participants were aware of the Australian Dietary Guidelines (25) 
with the most popular recollection being the visual format of the healthy food 
pyramid.   
“Is that the food pyramid stuff?”  - [Female Group 2 (FG2)]  
There was consensus that fruit and vegetables comprised the bottom “eat most” 
section of the pyramid hence were healthy.  Also, there was consensus that sugar 
was at the top of the pyramid indicating, “eat least”.  All other details regarding the 
structure of the pyramid varied.  There was some confusion over the positioning of 
carbohydrates such as bread, pasta and rice, some participants indicated these were 
“eat sometimes” and should not be eaten as frequently as fruit and vegetables, but 
the majority believed that they were on the same level as fruit and vegetables. The 
greatest confusion was regarding the correct positioning of meat and dairy products.  
Knowledge of serving sizes 
When prompted about serving sizes for different food groups there was a high level 
of disagreement and confusion.  The majority agreed that it varied from food to food 
but they were unsure regarding what constituted a serving size 
“In terms of actual (serving size) recommendations, I couldn’t visualise one.” – [Male 
Group 2 (MG2)]. 
“A serving size is about the palm of your hand” [FG4],  
“I thought it was the size of a deck of cards” [FG2], 
“A cup” [MG1],  
“It depends who you talk to” [FG4] 
While there was a general awareness of the Australian Dietary Guidelines (25), the 
majority indicted that they did not adhere to the guidelines. Of particular concern not 
following the dietary guidelines was identified as a choice rather than lack of 
awareness.   
6	
“I think the guidelines are good and I have a fair idea of what they are, but nine times 
out of ten,  I won’t follow them” – [MG1].    
“We know we’re not following them. It’s a deliberate choice” [FG2].  
The most common reason for not adhering to the guidelines was they lacked 
importance or relevance due to no sense of urgency.  The majority stated that 
healthy eating and following the guidelines only became relevant as a person grew 
older or started experiencing ill health or significant weight gain. 
“I don’t care enough! … because of my build I’ve never really had any weight 
problems. But it may be something that occurs in the future. But at the moment, I 
don’t have any reason to really change how I’m eating.”  [FG3].  
“We kind of have the impression that we’re young, we don’t need to worry about it at 
this point and we’ll cross that bridge when we’re 35 and have high cholesterol.” 
[MG2].    
Body image, appearance and weight control 
The majority of participants expressed that food choices, eating and eating 
behaviours were heavily influenced by body ideals. 
“Looking good is the biggest motivator for people our age.” – [FP3] 
“It’s much more about looks rather than general health” [MG3]. 
While the desire to ‘look good’ was expressed in all focus groups, the female groups 
consistently mentioned weight control and being skinny as the desired appearance. 
Some added they felt pressure from society to conform to the thin ideal. 
“Yes.  It’s about appearance more than anything else…in advertising they use very 
slim attractive people and you think, ‘Oh if I want to look like that then I should eat 
this’ or ‘ I shouldn’t eat this...” [FG1]. 
“Society pressure, perception that women should look skinny, amazing…and eat 
nothing” [FG4].   
Of particular concern was the general perception among females that being skinny 
was associated with being healthy.  
“People perceive skinny as being healthy” [FG1]. 
Weight control was mentioned less by male participants and their desire to ‘look 
good’ had a different focus.  Muscle gain and how to best achieve it was mentioned 
most by the males.  
7	
“Guys focus on eating the right sort of portions, so that they can gain the most 
weight, or muscle mass or fitness… but are those diets really healthy?” [MG2]   
“It tends to be more muscle gain for the blokes and weight loss for the girls.  It’s the 
pressure of every guy wanting to be huge and every girl wanting to be stick thin.” 
[MG3].  
Cooking skill and confidence 
Cooking skills were identified as important for eating a healthy diet. Cooking skill and 
confidence was also linked to cost. While these factors strongly influenced food 
choices for males they were also a consideration for females. However, females 
generally expressed more confidence in cooking skills than males.   
“Cooking skills are also a very big factor – I have very limited cooking skills. If it’s 
going to take too long to prepare, or it seems a bit too complex, then I’m more likely 
to just go out and buy something.” – [MP2]   
Whether or not you can cook influences your food choice – if you can’t cook then you 
go and get take away.” [FG1] 
Cooking skill and confidence was also linked to cost with many participants 
concerned about spoiling food and therefore wasting money. 
“You might have spent a lot of money on an expensive meal to prepare, and you 
burn it or stuff it up or something.” [MG2]. 
External influences on Food Choice 
External influence of food choice included: sources of nutrition knowledge; current 
living situation and peer influence; cost, convenience, time and effort required. 
Sources of nutrition knowledge 
Social media was the most common source of nutrition knowledge with the majority 
indicating that they do not search for nutrition information but they are exposed to it 
constantly. 
“I don’t think people really search for it [nutrition information]; if it comes up in social 
media then maybe people read about it.”   – [FG2] 
Both males and females commented that the majority of nutrition information on 
social media was accompanied by images of thin females and muscular males 
‘looking fit, healthy and happy’. These images were associated with participants’ 
knowledge about what contributed to being healthy.  
8	
“Slim fit girls are presented on social media as being in their active wear, drinking a 
smoothie.  Fit muscular guys are all about the supplements, how to get large.” [MG4]. 
“Instagram promotes this ideal that ‘healthiness equals happiness’ and that’s what 
everyone is striving for” [FG2].  
While social media in general was mentioned, there was a notable difference 
between males and females in the social media platforms used. While Facebook was 
identified evenly across the male and female groups, Instagram was frequently 
mentioned by females but rarely by males as a source of nutrition information.  The 
volume of nutrition information on social media were accompanied by images that 
created the desire to look ‘fit and healthy’ and contributed to body dissatisfaction. 
Some participants indicated they were aware that the images were unrealistic but 
were still envious and strived to look like the bodies portrayed in the images. 
“On Instagram in particular there are a lot of unrealistic portrayals of particularly 
girls…the pictures are very colourful and the girls look very happy and skinny, which 
brings out envy”. [FG2]  
Participants all spoke of the high number of celebrities and micro-celebrities (those 
who have become famous via social media) that promoted diets, supplements and 
exercise programs.   
“You see a lot of links on social media to things like ‘super diets’ or ‘my friend did this 
and had these results in 12 weeks” [MG3].  
“Perfect bodies on the paleo diet.  Stuff like that is all over social media.” [FG4].  
“The sheer amount of pages on Instagram – all of them are just of girls in their bikini, 
or of their meal.  You can’t go through your (news) feed without seeing them.” [FG4] 
Accuracy of the nutrition information on social media was generally not a concern 
with the majority indicating that the most popular measure of ‘accuracy’ was to ask 
friendship group if they had tried the diets or supplements and check if any had 
positive results.  When asked to clarify what was meant by ‘a positive result’ the 
common theme again was appearance. 
“I want to look fit and lean.” [MP4]  
“Losing weight and looking good” [FG3]. 
Participants were asked if they could recall any health promotion campaigns as these 
may have contributed to nutrition knowledge.  Recognition of the Live Lighter 
campaign and the Go for 2 & 5 campaign were high with all female groups and the 
9	
majority of male groups.  While recognition was high, participants agreed that they 
were not the target audience with many questioning the relevance of these 
campaigns to their age group.  
“I don’t think they target us” [MG3] 
“They use middle age people in those commercials…it doesn’t feel relevant to us” 
[FG1] 
While most identified a key message of the Live Lighter campaign was to reduce 
intake of sugary drinks they indicated this message did not motivate behaviour 
change. 
“I probably drink a lot more soft drink than I should, but then I’m still skinny.  So you 
wonder if anything is really going to happen.  It makes me think about it, but it doesn’t 
change my behaviour.” [MP3].   
Furthermore, the health consequences outlined in the campaign felt irrelevant to the 
participants because health consequences were ‘future concerns.  
“I can’t image my visceral fat being that bad compared to that man.  It doesn’t feel 
relevant.” [FP4].   
“People (our age) don’t think the consequences of those ads will happen to them” 
[MG3].   
Both male and female participants were adamant that focusing on negative 
consequences associated with food choice had no impact on their eating behaviour.  
“Health promotion messages are so negative – like this is what happens to your gut 
when you drink coke.  I know it’s supposed to have an impact, but I don’t feel like it 
has a significant impact.” [FG3].  
“There is as sense that it’s not urgent and that it doesn’t apply to us” [MG4]  
Living situation and peer influence 
There was consensus that living at home with parents had a positive influence on 
food intake because parents stocked the fridge and pantry, which to some extent 
dictated food choice.  Participants also noted the quality and variety of food improved 
when living at home with parents mainly due to the associated high cost of healthy 
food.   
10	
“When you’re living at home, you can’t really control what your Mum and Dad buy 
and put in the cupboard, as opposed to when you live independently… you can.” – 
[FP2]. 
“If you’re by yourself your main consideration is finances rather than your health. 
Healthy food is more expensive” [MG2]. 
Consequently, the majority indicated that living at home made it easier to eat healthy 
food. Mothers were identified as a positive source of information and influence on 
food choice  
“My Mum always served veggies or salad with meals, and now it’s just become a 
habit rather than a knowledge of the guidelines.”  [MP1]. 
“It comes back to cost.  Last year I was out of home and not eating well at all – I was 
just eating whatever was on special.  Now I’m back home, mainly to save money, 
Mum and Dad provide much more variety and better food.  It makes a big difference” 
[MG3]. 
The majority indicated that being with friends, socially and also living with peers 
increased the likelihood of choosing unhealthy food.  
“It depends on who you’re with – if I’m hanging out with friends that are eating junk 
food, then I’ll eat it with them.”  - [FP3] 
“If you’re sharing a house with friends, you’re generally influenced by what your 
friends cook.  So if there’s someone cooking, then you might be inclined to cook 
more, but if someone’s always going out to get crap food, then you’re more inclined 
to do that as well” [MG3]  
Cost, convenience, time and effort required 
Regardless of living situation cost, convenience, time and effort required were 
recurring themes across all focus groups having significant impact on their food 
choices. There was a very strong perception among participants that university 
students consumed fast foods because they were cheaper and more convenient 
even though they acknowledged it was unhealthy.  
“You’re normally going for the cheap stuff, which ends up being the bad stuff” [FG3].  
While cost and convenience made fast food an attractive option another influencing 
factor was effort.  Many participants identified that healthy eating required more time, 
effort and preparation than they were prepared to give. 
11	
“It’s a lot easier to just go and get take away then it is to actually make something, 
especially if you’re home late. Because you have to go to the effort of buying it, 
making it, and cleaning up afterwards.” [MP4]  
Nutrition knowledge emerging adults want and how best to deliver it 
Weight loss and appearance was again the predominant focus of the type of 
information participants wanted. Related to weight loss, many identified a need for 
accurate information particularly regarding serving sizes.  
“It’s important to know how big a serving size is, because frequently you think it’s 
bigger than it actually is [FP2]   
“A lot of people don’t realize it’s not just eating healthier, it’s lowering your portion 
size as well that helps lose weight” [MG2].   
Accurate information regarding healthy ways to lose weight quickly was considered 
important particularly by female participants.   
“The quickest way to lose the weight and being healthy as possible” [FG1]   
The majority identified that correct information regarding fad diets would also be 
relevant to ensure more of a balance of food consumed. 
“People go on extreme diets where they just focus far too much on eating one type 
of food, when there needs to be more of a balance” [MG3]  
“People our age need information about skipping meals and meal replacements 
shakes; how they are not effective in actually helping people lose weight” [FG2]. 
Participants highlighted that nutrition information focusing on body image and 
appearance rather than health risks would be more relevant.  
“The approach needs to be image based - not ‘it’s going to make you ‘feel better’ but 
‘it’s going to make you look better’…results that appeal to us might make a 
difference” [MG1].   
Many participants, especially females, indicated they would like to see more of a 
positive body image focus.  
“Promoting what is a realistic amount of weight loss for different body types” [FG4]   
“Not using unattainable, un-realistic bodies or celebrities, just use normal people” 
[FG3].  
12	
Participants also identified that nutrition messages need to be more positive 
and focus on immediate benefits rather than long term health risks.  
“It comes down to promoting fun - not ‘don’t eat this, don’t do this’.  Finding a way to 
say ‘hey look what you can do if your actually get out there and do stuff and you eat 
good food – it’s fun” [FP3].   
“Might be more effective if they focus on something that we can see or feel almost 
immediately” [MG4].  
Another important aspect mentioned by participants related to cost of food.  It was 
strongly suggested that healthy food be more cost effective.   
“If you made the healthier, more nutritious food cheaper than the less healthy foods 
that could make some difference” [MP1]  
“Cheap places to pick up vegies and maybe healthy cheap meal ideas” [FG2]. 
Regarding how best to deliver nutrition Information there was consensus it should be 
online incorporating social media (Figure 1). 
“People our age don’t watch TV…it’s got to be online” [MG3].   
“Social media because that’s what we’re exposed to the most – but the dietary 
guidelines aren’t on social media” [FG3].  
Discussion 
This study provides an Australian context to international evidence regarding 
influences on dietary behaviour among university students aged 18-25 years (2, 7, 9- 
11, 26, 27). Findings confirm that the cost of food when living independently 
influences food choice with a strong perception among participants that healthy food 
costs significantly more than unhealthy food (7, 8, 28).  Also consistent with 
international studies the participants in this study acknowledged that peers 
influenced their decision to consume unhealthy foods, while living with parents 
positively affected this food choice (9, 10, 27). This study also identified that cooking 
skills and confidence, as well as time and effort required in the preparation of food, 
were considerations with participants reporting that convenience, confidence and 
cooking skill often influences food choices.  More research needs to be conducted to 
further explore how significant these influences are on food choice. 
Our findings also show similarities with previous research regarding Australian 
emerging adults’ diets not adhering to recommended dietary guidelines (3, 29, 30). 
A novel finding of this study is that while emerging adults have some knowledge 
13	
regarding the Australian Dietary Guidelines (25) they deliberately choose not to 
follow them because they do not consider healthy eating a priority or relevant to their 
age group, and its information is not promoted on social media. While previous 
health promotion campaigns in Australia have attempted to promote the importance 
of healthy eating, (13, 31, 32), they have not specifically targeted emerging adults. 
Although our study supports previous findings that suggest some key messages 
such as eat more fruit and vegetables and less sugar seem to reach Australian 
university students (11, 12, 33, 34), these messages do not translate to eating 
behaviour. For example, participants identified difficulty in translating messages such 
as Go for 2&5 in ‘real life’ food choices due to confusion over what constitutes a 
serving size. Further, many Australian campaigns have focused on the effects of 
poor nutrition, such as obesity, visceral fat on vital organs, diabetes, high blood 
pressure, cancer and heart problems. While participants could recall messages from 
campaigns such as Live Lighter they perceived these messages as irrelevant and 
reported they had no influence on food choice because the health consequences 
highlighted generally occur in middle age or even later. Consequently, our study 
participants were not motivated to change their food choices because there is no 
sense of urgency (6, 11, 12, 15, 35).  
Regarding sources of nutrition knowledge, participants indicated that they do not 
watch commercial television, which has traditionally been the major medium for 
communicating public health messages.  To the authors knowledge this is the first 
Australian study that identifies social media as the most commonly used source of 
nutrition knowledge for emerging adults.  Participants in our study were engaged by 
and frequently shared nutrition information in the form of fad-diets and exercise 
programs ‘posted’ by celebrities and micro-celebrities that they ‘follow’. They 
acknowledged they followed these programs, regardless of the nutritional value or 
efficacy of the exercise programs which is concerning, given all the participants were 
university students with many studying health related degrees. As the majority of 
these programs and accompanying messages focus on body ideals this could 
explain why appearance and body dissatisfaction, generally in the form of weight 
control, emerged as the largest influence on food choice for the participants in our 
study.  The majority of participants stated that their interest in nutrition information 
shared on social media was ‘sparked’ based on the appearance of the person in the 
‘post’. The majority of the ‘posts’ contained images of thin, bikini-clad young woman 
and fit, lean, muscular young men.  This adds to the findings of Tiggemann and Miller 
14	
(36) in their study of adolescent girls which found girls who spent more time on social 
media had higher levels of drive for thinness.   
Another new finding reported by our study is that social media users do not 
specifically search for nutrition knowledge rather they have constant access to 
nutrition information via their ‘newsfeed’. Accuracy of this information was not a 
significant concern to participants, with most simply asking their friends if they have 
tried the particular diet or supplement ‘trending’ on social media and what were their 
‘results’.  The majority reported the desired ‘results’ of these diets and supplements 
were to look ‘fit and lean’ and looking this way was associated with being healthy. 
Given that approximately 89% of online 18-29 years olds are regularly using social 
media (37) the consumption of ‘weight and appearance’ focused nutrition information 
is clearly contributing to the participants’ perception that being skinny (for females) 
and muscular (for males) means that a person is healthy. While all participants 
identified social media as the major source of nutrition knowledge, female 
participants specifically identified Instagram as the primary social media platform 
utilised.  Given that Instagram is an image based platform this may be further 
contributing to the emphasis on weight control and appearance, which may be 
reinforcing the perception that being thin is ideal and also healthy.  Further 
reinforcing these ‘thin ideals’ may be the ‘weight control’ approach to nutrition that 
has been utilized by Australian health promotion campaigns such as Live Lighter (14, 
31, 32). Females in our study acknowledged there was societal pressure to conform 
to the thin ideal.  Regardless of gender, this belief that appearance is the main 
marker of health is concerning as it may further contribute to body dissatisfaction and 
influence food choices among emerging adults as a way of achieving this thin or buff 
body. More research focusing with this target group is needed to further understand 
these associations.  
The findings of this study must be considered in light of some limitations. The 
participants were a convenience sample drawn from one university campus, however 
replication of some results suggest this group is similar to others university and 
college based studies reported in the literature.  As a select sample  of university 
students, their education level may mean that their nutrition knowledge is higher 
than other groups of emerging adults therefore, results and associations cannot be 
generalised to the whole emerging adult community.  While the sample may not be 
fully representative of the emerging adult population, the participants were keen to 
have their voices heard and provided in depth insights into the influences on their 
15	
food choices and implications for communicating nutrition information. A strength of 
the study was the design that adhered to focus group methodology hence saturation 
of categories was achieved and the initial content analysis was validated by the 
content analysis performed through NVivo v11 (24) adding to the rigour of the 
results.   
Conclusion and implications 
Given that emerging adults attending university do not consider dietary guidelines or 
health promotion campaigns relevant, the findings of this investigation have 
implications for preventive health strategies targeting this age group. Future 
campaigns should therefore deliver positive nutrition messages  and present benefits 
of healthy eating rather than on future health risks. In addition, accurate information 
regarding serving sizes was identified as important because participants found it 
difficult to translate current nutrition messages into actions they could utilise in their 
daily lives. Participants also indicated that it was necessary for healthy food to be 
made more affordable to encourage healthy eating.  Therefore, future health 
promotion campaigns could include suggestions for accessing and preparing low 
cost healthy ingredients and meals, as these may positively influence food choice. 
There was also a desire for accurate information regarding current fad-diets as well 
as healthful strategies for weight loss.  This presents a challenge for health 
promotion to counteract current appearance related perceptions regarding health in a 
rapidly changing, social media saturated environment that heavily promotes thin or 
muscular body ideals. There were calls for more realistic body shapes on social 
media, especially by the female participants. Perhaps this is where health promoters 
should direct their attention because the insidious nature of the constant appearance 
comparison ever present on social media makes it unrealistic for many to achieve the 
current ideal body in a healthful way.   
Not only should the nature of messages change but also the mode of delivery.  Given 
the participants in this study do not watch television and identified social media as 
the preferred source of nutrition information, health professionals need to rethink how 
to best communicate future public health nutrition messages to this audience. While 
social media appears to negatively influence perceptions of health and eating 
behavior it may also provide the potential solution. However more research is 
needed regarding potential barriers and challenges associated with social media and 
emerging adults health behaviours (38).  Many platforms exist in the social media 
16	
space and little is known about which platform would be the most effective for this 
target group.  The results of this study indicate that Instagram could be an avenue for 
further investigation as female participants identified it as their most commonly 
utilised social media platform.  Clearly, more research in this area is required to 
confirm the findings of our study so that emerging adults’ transition into adulthood 
with accurate, useful nutrition knowledge that will potentially result in a healthy diet 
and the accompanying health benefits (2, 12, 26).